---
layout: post
title: Future.transform in Scala 2.12
---

Scala 2.12 added a few improvements to `scala.concurrent.Future`. Here I am going to take a quick look at the new `transform` and `transformWith` methods. First, let's see the old method signature:

``` scala
 def transform[S](s: (T) ⇒ S, f: (Throwable) ⇒ Throwable): Future[S]
```
 >Creates a new future by applying the 's' function to the successful result of this future, or the 'f' function to the failed result.

The main shortcoming of this method is related to `f`. Even though we can handle the exception case, the signature `Throwable ⇒ Throwable` bounds the future to fail once an exception is thrown.

The new method is much more powerful in this regard:

``` scala
 def transform[S](f: (Try[T]) ⇒ Try[S]): Future[S] 

```
>Creates a new Future by applying the specified function to the result of this Future.

By providing a function `Try[T] ⇒ Try[S]` we can handle both `Success` and `Failure` cases and transform them in any way we like. For example, if we want a future to always complete successfully we can now write it like this:

``` diff
  scala> val future = Future(throw new Exception("Oops"))

  scala> future.transform {
      case Success(_) => Try("OK")
      case Failure(_) => Try("KO")
  }

  res0: scala.concurrent.Future[String] = Future(Success(KO))
```

To achieve a similar behaviour in Scala 2.11 we would have to combine `map` and `recover` statements or use `onComplete` in a Promise.

The new `transformWith` unifies `flatMap` and `recoverWith` in a similar way. Here is the signature:

``` scala
def transformWith[S](f: Try[T] => Future[S]): Future[S]
```
>Creates a new Future by applying the specified function, which produces a Future, to the result of this Future.

If you want to transform your result and you need to return another `Future` instead of a `Try`, go for `transformWith`.

Make sure to check the [blog posts](https://github.com/viktorklang/blog) from Viktor Klang for more information about Futures on Scala 2.12 and, as always, check the [documentation](http://www.scala-lang.org/api/2.12.0/scala/concurrent/Future.html) for details.